Rework Documentation, part 1 (#147)
projectsyn/commodore: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/reference/architecture.adoc

= Architecture

Commodore's architecture roughly corresponds to the diagram below.

> // TODO architecture diagram

Reviewer: Might need to be done or removed before this can be merged.

Author: Removed for now since I don't even remember what I envisioned here.

Commodore's operation can be separated into three rough stages: dependency
fetching, catalog compilation, and secrets management.

Apart from these stages of operation, we also document other architectural
choices in this page.

== Dependency Fetching

Currently, the first part of Commodore's operation revolves around fetching
all the dependencies required to compile a catalog.
Dependency fetching is implemented using Git repositories and `git clone` and
calls to the Lieutenant API.

Commodore fetches the following dependencies:

* Cluster facts from Lieutenant API
* Global configuration
* Tenant configuration

> * Components as discovered in global and tenant configuration

Reviewer 2: * Jsonnet libraries as described in the inventory

All of these includes are considered to be components that need to be fetched.
Unless instructed otherwise, Commodore will fetch components from subfolder
`commodore-components` in the
xref:reference/cli.adoc#_catalog_compile[global Git base].

The file `commodore.yml` in the root of the Global configuration repository
can be used to override the repository autodiscovery for components.
The file must contain a key `components` which holds an array of dictionaries
with keys `name` and `url`.
Each array entry specifies the repository URL of a single component.
A sample `commodore.yml` can be found below.

.commodore.yml
[source,yaml]
--
components:
- name: argocd
  url: https://github.com/projectsyn/component-argocd.git
- name: metrics-server
  url: https://github.com/projectsyn/component-metrics-server.git
--

=== Component Versioning

As described in the xref:reference/concepts.md[Commodore concepts], component
versions can be specified in the configuration hierarchy.
Component versions are tracked using the inventory parameter
`component_versions` and default to `master`.
An example:

[source,yaml]
--
parameters:
  component_versions:
    argocd:

>       version: v1.0.0

Reviewer 2: Optionally the `url: ` key can be used to override the URL for a component.

--

Reusing the <<_configuration_hierarchy,configuration hierarchy>> for
specifying the component versions allows tight integration of component
version management with the rest of the configuration.

After cloning component repositories, all components will be checked out on

> branch `master`, as this is what Git defaults to.

Reviewer 2: Is it `master` or just the default branch?
```suggestion
the repo's default branch, as this is what Git defaults to.
```

Commodore will then explicitly check out the version specified in the
inventory for any components that specify a version.
The version specification is parsed from the inventory using Kapitan's
inventory parsing, allowing the version to be overridden at any point in the
configuration hierarchy.

== Catalog Compilation

> Commodore uses https://kapitan.dev[Kaptian] to compile the cluster catalog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commodore uses https://kapitan.dev[Kapitan] to compile the cluster catalog.
```

    type: builtin
    filter: helm_namespace
    filterargs:
      namespace: ${metrics_server:namespace}
      create_namespace: "true"
--

== Secrets Management

Commodore makes use of https://kapitan.dev/secrets/[Kapitan's secrets
management capabilities], but currently only supports references to secrets in
Vault (called "Vaultkv" in the Kapitan documentation).

Commodore takes care of generating secret reference files for any secret
references (denoted by `?{vaultkv:...}`) found in key `parameters` in  all the
classes included by the Kapitan cluster target.
Secret references can use reclass references to define dynamic defaults, as
Commodore searches for secret references in the rendered reclass inventory.

Commodore saves the generated reference files are stored in the cluster
catalog in directory `refs/`.
This directory is configured as the base path in which Kapitan searches for
reference files during compilation, allowing references in the inventory to
omit the `catalog/refs` prefix which the would have to include otherwise.

Because Commodore manages the secret files, it can guarantee that the secret
files and the catalog are always in sync.

> All secret references MUST be made in the configuration parameters, otherwise

Reviewer 2: We should probably also mention that the compiled output *must* include the secret ref in clear text (i.e. no base64), for example by using `stringData` for secrets.
